---
title: "Flood Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles"
collection: 'Water'
venue: 'Water'
permalink: /publication/2018-06-28-seminal-deep-learning-sequence-nlp
excerpt: 'In the event of a flood, being able to build accurate flood level maps is essential for supporting emergency plan operations. In order to build such maps, it is important to collect observations from the disaster area. Social media platforms can be useful sources of information in this case, as people located in the flood area tend to share text and pictures depicting the current situation. Developing an effective and fully automatized method able to retrieve data from social media and extract useful information in real-time is crucial for a quick and proper response to these catastrophic events. In this paper, we propose a method to quantify flood-water from images gathered from social media. If no prior information about the zone where the picture was taken is available, one possible way to estimate the flood level consists of assessing how much the objects appearing in the image are submerged in water. There are various factors that make this task difficult: i) the precise size of the objects appearing in the image might not be known; ii) flood-water appearing in different zones of the image scene might have different height; iii) objects may be only partially visible as they can be submerged in water. In order to solve these problems, we propose a method that first locates selected classes of objects whose sizes are approximately known, then, it leverages this property to estimate the water level. To prove the validity of this approach, we first build a flood-water image dataset, then we use it to train a deep learning model. We finally show the ability of our trained model to recognize objects and at the same time predict correctly flood-water level.
Keywords: Object detection, Deep learning, Image segmentation, Flood estimation, Instance segmentation, Flood detection'
date: 2022-09-22
citation: 'Chaudhary P, Leitão JP, Donauer T, D’Aronco S, Perraudin N, Obozinski G, Perez-Cruz F, Schindler K, Wegner JD, Russo S. Flood Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles. Water. 2022; 14(19):2980. https://doi.org/10.3390/w14192980'
paperurl: 'https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/14/19/2980'
---
*Abstract*

We propose a probabilistic deep learning approach for the prediction of maximum water depth hazard maps at high spatial resolutions, which assigns well-calibrated uncertainty estimates to every predicted water depth. Efficient, accurate, and trustworthy methods for urban flood management have become increasingly important due to higher rainfall intensity caused by climate change, the expansion of cities, and changes in land use. While physically based flood models can provide reliable forecasts for water depth at every location of a catchment, their high computational burden is hindering their application to large urban areas at high spatial resolution. While deep learning models have been used to address this issue, a disadvantage is that they are often perceived as “black-box” models and are overconfident about their predictions, therefore decreasing their reliability. Our deep learning model learns the underlying phenomena a priori from simulated hydrodynamic data, obviating the need for manual parameter setting for every new rainfall event at test time. The only inputs needed at the test time are a rainfall forecast and parameters of the terrain such as a digital elevation model to predict the maximum water depth with uncertainty estimates for complete rainfall events. We validate the accuracy and generalisation capabilities of our approach through experiments on a dataset consisting of catchments within Switzerland and Portugal and 18 rainfall patterns. Our method produces flood hazard maps at 1 m resolution and achieves mean absolute errors as low as 21 cm for extreme flood cases with water above 1 m. Most importantly, we demonstrate that our approach is able to provide an uncertainty estimate for every water depth within the predicted hazard map, thus increasing the model’s trustworthiness during flooding events.

[Download report here](https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/14/19/2980)

Recommended citation: Chaudhary P, Leitão JP, Donauer T, D’Aronco S, Perraudin N, Obozinski G, Perez-Cruz F, Schindler K, Wegner JD, Russo S. Flood Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles. Water. 2022; 14(19):2980. https://doi.org/10.3390/w14192980

